This study provides a field-deployable approach to obtaining objective GPS data to characterize the role of human movement in the epidemiology of malaria in river networks in the Peruvian Amazon. Although human movement has previously been indirectly pointed as important for malaria risk and exposure based on epidemiologic, molecular and vector biology studies (3, 4, 8, 9), and also portrayed using new geo-referencing approached tailored to the lack of network accessibility in these settings (19, 20), this study provides the basis to obtain fine-scale resolution to obtain evidence regarding the influence of human movement in malaria transmission. This study additionally demonstrates the utility of a low-cost 3D printable GPS technology combined with movement ecology analytical approaches to collect and characterize human movement patterns for disease studies.

The preliminary findings shown here suggest a higher movement to other villages in the same watershed than previously proposed. This movement inevitably increases the importation risk (previously known as vulnerability) in settings with heterogeneous malaria transmissions (32), this in turn is a component of the malariogenic potential, that is defined as the “likelihood of local transmission that is the product of receptivity, risk of importation of malaria parasites and infectivity of imported parasites” (32). Thus, as the landscape of most malaria high-risk areas in Loreto are comparable to the river network analyzed in this study, the high connectivity between risk-heterogeneous units likely contributed to the rapid rebound of malaria transmission observed after the interruption of intervention coverage after 2010. However, as we only sampled participants from one village, further studies are needed to fully evaluate the connectivity between villages within this watershed, including movements of other populations into Gamitanacocha. Although this analysis clearly demonstrates the movement of pathogens and people to surrounding areas, further population-based longitudinal studies are needed to characterize the roles of these movements in malaria transmission.

These findings are consistent with previous studies in the Amazon region that used self-reported travel questionnaires (3) and participatory mapping (20). In comparison with the aforementioned approaches, custom GPS monitors reported in this study, were able to describe fine-scale resolution and a larger variety of movement patterns, and this approach has the advantage of avoiding recall bias. Trajectories confirmed that villagers with occupational activities outside the community were the most active movers, who were also those who presented more malaria infections. These preliminary results support the hypothesis of high importation risk due to occupational activities. A higher sample size along with genetic epidemiological data will be required to more confidently delineate travel patterns that might predict local and imported cases.

The movement of asymptomatic Plasmodium spp. carriers, regardless of the location of infection acquisition, represent an important barrier to current malaria control strategies in the Peruvian Amazon. These findings are consistent with previous molecular studies where high parasite population flow was observed at micro-geographical scales and was hypothesized to be due to high human movement (8–10). The concurrent flow of human and parasite populations potentially increases the diversity of strains with different drug-resistant profiles (33), genome deletion that prevents the diagnostic capacity (i.e., HRP-2 deletion) (34), and infectivity efficiency, defined as the “ability of a given Plasmodium strain to establish an infection in an Anopheles mosquito species and undergo development until the mosquito has sporozoites in its salivary glands”(32).

Movement ecology approaches shed light to the movement processes. Analysis of space use (as measured by UD) revealed substantial heterogeneity in individual movements, with infected individuals primarily using larger geographic areas. Importantly, similar trends were observed during peak mosquito biting times at night, suggesting interventions targeted only at households may not prevent malaria in these individuals. Results from these analyses demonstrate how low-cost GPS technology can be combined with movement ecology approaches to quantitatively estimate human space use and environmental selection for epidemiological studies. A substantial variation in environmental selection between individuals with different infection statuses was observed, although no significant differences in environmental selection between infected and non-infected individuals were observed as consequence of the small sample size and wide range. Of movement patterns for the same participant; however marked patterns were observed in infected participants than those non-infected during the study period.

Taken together, these findings suggest that malaria control efforts in Peruvian rural Amazon might prioritize not only high-risk units (villages or districts), but also include their highly connected units to address malaria importation or exportation during transit or return to those units. In this sense and taking into account the topography of the Peruvian Amazon, river basins arise as promising surveillance units. Further studies are suggested to assess the effectiveness of such surveillance units as new approach.

Despite fine spatio-temporal coverage of human movements in the study, some limitations were recognized in this study. First, it is recognized that human movement can vary seasonally (13), especially in the Peruvian Amazon where particular occupations, such as logging and fishing, depend on seasonal environmental conditions (3, 4). It is expected that villagers change their movement profiles to seek better conditions to carry out their activities. This study only recorded the human movement in 1-month surveillance and studies with longer surveillance periods could capture the changes in the movement profile relative to the changes in the malaria transmission. Secondly, despite field-workers replacing battery in the weekly visits, gaps in movement tracking were observed. While analytic approaches developed to address these sampling inaccuracies were applied (i.e., biased random bridges - BRBs), periods without data could potentially bias this study. Finally, the size and weight of the GPS tracker device are key characteristics for a routine use of these devices in the Loreto population (23). The device developed in this study has a larger size and weight than previously reported as ideal for these types of studies (23). Despite the fact that field-workers encouraged participants for the continuous use of the GPS tracking to minimize non-informative GPS tracks, few (~12.3 person-days of follow-up – 5% total follow-up period) non-moving periods were detected and cleaned during the geo-processing. Future work aimed to reduce the size and weight of the device but maintaining the battery life and characteristics described.

To conclude, this study developed an open-source low-cost 3D printable GPS tracker for epidemiological studies under challenging environmental conditions such as the Amazon jungle and provided evidence that suggest an important role of human movement in the epidemiology of malaria in river networks in the Peruvian Amazon. The collected fine-scale movement patterns were observed relative to participant's infection status and occupation activities. This evidence suggests that the commuting patterns between villages of the same river network potentially jeopardizes the current control strategies in these areas. Further studies are suggested to evaluate a more comprehensive watershed-based approach to improve the malaria control in the Peruvian Amazon river networks.
